---
layout: post
title: "Amman: Something"
date: 2018-04-29
desc: "We time in Amman at the beginning and end of our time in Jordan, and..."
keywords: "Middle East, Jordan, Amman, Petra, Dead Sea, Wadi Rum, Jet bus, restaurants, street food, What to Do, RTW"
categories: [Europe]
tags: Jordan
icon: icon-html
image: blog/.jpg
author: Nate
country: Jordan
hidden: false

---


Beijing was our only stop in mainland China, and was included in our [around the world air ticket](http://site.awellchartedpath.com/blog/2017/08/RTW-Overview/) mostly because we wanted to visit one of Amy's friends and because so many flights around Asia connect through it. We got really lucky with both the weather (great except for one day of rain) and the air pollution (only somewhat unhealthy) so got to spend a lot of time outdoors and in parks around Beijing. We also got lucky in getting to spend so much time socializing and seeing what life is like as a foreign student studying in Beijing, which was a great break from the tourism taking up most of our days.

Before arriving we had been mentally preparing for our time in Beijing to be similar to [what we experienced in India](http://site.awellchartedpath.com/blog/2018/03/new-delhi/) but ultimately that wasn't the case at all. While it was definitely crowded in Beijing but it didn't have the feel of chaos or aggression we felt in crowds in India. The subway system was super easy to use, and we never felt uncomfortable walking around, even when picking our way through unfamiliar [hutongs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hutong). The language barrier from us not knowing any Chinese was definitely real, but in general people were happy to try to help us with as much pointing and gesturing as we could muster, and no one seemed to be annoyed to be dealing with us.

We stayed in central Beijing, at the **Siheju Courtyard Hotel** in the Xisi Hutong. We booked a cool-looking `Sunshine Room` which had a glass ceiling and all-glass front with a balcony, but which ended up being unsatisfying due to the need to keep our drapes shut since the balcony was used to hang laundry constantly, and by the awful unrelenting smell emanating from the bathroom drains. The included breakfast was pretty weak as well, and very inconsistent, to the point where we ended up skipping it completely for our final two mornings.

## <i class="fa fa-check-square" aria-hidden="true" style="color:#2495C4;"></i> What We Did in Amman

**Day 1:** arrival at 5:30am, smoothest trip through airport, arrive to hotel, hashem's breakfast, amphitheater, get passes, citadel, ice cream, check-in, relax, rainbow street: falafel sandwiches and then shawarma

**Day 2:** amphitheater, rain, habibah sweets, paris circle, bakery w/ eggs, more rain, dinner at Hashem's, more ice cream

**Day 3:** post nerd time, walk to jett bus, tickets, mall/sunglasses, promenade, walk to Shawarma Reem, falafel sandwiches, habibah sweets, dinner at...

**Day 4:** depart super early

**Day 5:** return from Wadi Rum, 

**Day 6:** Dead Sea

**Day 7:** Depart in mid-morning

## <i class="fa fa-check-square" aria-hidden="true" style="color:#2495C4;"></i> How We Did with Our Budget in Jordan

For our time in CITY, we had budgeted as much as 65 USD a night for accommodations. We ended up spending 72 USD per night for our disappointing hotel room at the Siheju Courtyard Hotel, though we didn't want to stretch our budget any higher so it may have been the best we could afford.

We had also budgeted 15 USD per day per person for food and 15 USD per day per person for entertainment. Out of that planned 60 USD total, we ended up spending 56 USD per day on average, including 26 USD total for 15 separate trips on the subway and the 100 USD total we spent on our great evening out with Ellie and friends on Day 4. Overall, we ended up spending 6 USD more than we had budgeted for our full visit to China, or less than one percent!

Overall, in Jordan...