---
layout: post
title: "Jaipur: It doesn't get easier"
date: 2018-03-13
desc: "We spent three days in Jaipur, we saw the sights, took a tour, and spent a day hold up in our hotel room. Enjoying India hasn't really gotten easier."
keywords: "Asia, India, Jaipur, Amber Fort, Uber, What to Do, RTW"
categories: [Asia]
tags: India
icon: icon-html
image: blog/.jpg
author: Amy
country: India
hidden: false

---

After an [packed schedule of tourist activity in Agra](http://site.awellchartedpath.com/blog/2018/03/agra/), we took another train (this time not overnight) to Jaipur hoping that it would be less overwhelming than Varanasi and allow us more freedom to explore than Agra.

We stayed at **Jai Niwas**, a fairly cute little hotel that is tucked away down a side street and so away from the noisy traffic and general hustle and bustle. The rooms are situated around several small courtyards. The restaurant has tasty food at an affordable price and the internet was the best we've had in months. Needless to say, we were pleased with our selection.  

## <i class="fa fa-check-square" aria-hidden="true" style="color:#2495C4;"></i> What We Did in Jaipur

Even though most people probably have never heard of this city that makes up one corner of the "Golden Triangle" of tourist cities in India, it is home to over 3 million people. With that many people, the streets are packed and crazy though with fewer cows than in Varanasi. There were surprisingly few restaurants and despite a few streets having sidewalks, it was not very walkable. 

**Day 1:** We arrived around 1:00pm to the Jaipur train station, which was probably the nicest one we've been through so far. We were able to stop at an ATM on our way our an get an Uber to pick us up and drop us off at our hotel without incident, which felt like a real luxury. 

We wanted to get a feel for the city and were hopeful that the fact that it has a metro and is not as tourist focused as Agra would mean that we could walk around and explore more easily. So, we left our hotel and made our way a short distance to MI Road, an upscale shopping street. While the shops do cater to the middle class and wealthy with several western stores scattered in the mix, traffic is bad and the sidewalks are disjointed and don't seem to get any use. Still, we pushed on until we reached a McDonalds where we could get an ice cream cone after the lassi shop we wanted to visit was already closed. We only made it half a mile but it was about all I was willing to do as the sun was setting, so we headed back to the hotel for dinner. 

**Day 2:** Today was our big day of sightseeing. We decided to try out a feature listed in the Uber app as "Uber Hire" that allows you to book an Uber for a period of time rather than just taking it one way to a destination. We were picked up without a problem and made our way to the Amber or Amer Fort, the primary tourist attraction of Jaipur. 

The Amber Fort is on top of a ridge about 14 km outside the city but with traffic through the center of the city it took us about 40 minutes to get there. When you arrive you can take an elephant ride up to the fort for 1000 Rupees for two people but we had no desire to do this and had our driver drop us off at the top instead. 

	AMBER FORT 
	Nahargarh Fort
	passing by the floating palace

Overall, for 4 hours and two different stops along the way we paid 800 Rupees (~12 USD). Our hotel offered a car service for visiting the same two forts we did at 1200 Rupees (~18 USD). We probably could have gotten a tuktuk for closer to 600 Rupees (~9 USD) but then would have had to go without airconditioning, which was nice to have when the temperatures were over 90 degrees. 

We made it back to our hotel for a late lunch and a little rest before heading back out for a walking tour. I had reservations about doing another **Yo Tours** walking tour after the one we did in Varanasi hadn't been as good as we hoped but the original reason I gave it a try was the good reviews for the Jaipur tour, so we decided to give it a second chance and ended up glad we did. 

The tour didn't actually cover that much ground but did let us see more of the Old Town than we likely would have otherwise. We started at the **Hawa Mahal** or Palace of the Winds, where females in the royal family were able to hide behind the intricate marble screens and watch the comings and goings on the street below without being seen. From there we headed down some of the alleys, which are laid out in a grid-pattern though it doesn't give the same impression of orderliness that I got use to in downtown DC. We stoped to see houses that have been standing for 300 years, shops that use recycled paper to make boxes for wedding invitations, temples, and the more traditional stops at the **City Palace**, **Jantar Mantar**, and got a view of the seven story **Isarlat** tower as the sun was setting. 

My favorite stop of the tour was the last one, which took us behind an active temple to Shiva up on the roof of what seemed to be a family home in order to appreciate the southern style architecture that can't be seen from the outside. We ended the tour as the sun was setting and grabbed another Uber (so convenient!) back to our hotel for dinner. 

**Day 3:** After some trying days and frustrations in India, I had gotten to the point where I was trying to convince Nate to forget our next two week in India and just figure out a way to get to Japan as soon as possible. Instead, he convinced me that the rest of our time in India was more promising than the time we'd spent so far (big exception for the Taj Mahal, which was exactly as wonderful as I thought it would be) and that logistically and financially skipping to Japan early didn't make sense. 

Still, to let me recharge and get back in the spirit of adventure, we spent the full day at our hotel relaxing, catching up with people back home, and working on some projects. 

Other than days we've been sick, I think this was the first day we just opted out of travel adventures and I think it was sorely needed. We often push ourselves to go out an soak up as much of each place as possible, especially places that we aren't stay for very long but sometimes you just need a break, even from travel. 

**Day 4:** Our last day in Jaipur was a long one because we had to checkout of our hotel at 11am but our train to Jaisalmer was not until 11:45pm. 

After breakfast at the hotel, we got another Uber to take us to the **Monkey Temple** to the east of the city.





## <i class="fa fa-check-square" aria-hidden="true" style="color:#2495C4;"></i> How We Did with Our Budget

For our time in Agra, we had budgeted as much as 45 USD a night for accommodations. We ended up spending 55 USD per night for our room at **Hotel Atulyaa Taj**, choosing to spend the extra to be right near the Taj Mahal (which didn't end up making a ton of difference). With just two nights here, we were able to balance out that cost with other, cheaper bookings elsewhere in India pretty easily.

We had also budgeted 10 USD per day per person for food and 10 USD per day per person for entertainment, plus an extra 30 USD to cover our Taj Mahal admission. Out of that planned 55 USD total, we ended up spending 117 USD per day on average, with most of that on our car/driver/guide (130 USD including tips). Just for meals, we averaged only 2.8 USD per person, while site admissions took a toll on our budget (51 USD _not_ including the Taj Mahal's 30 USD fee).

One final note: This trip has really made me appreciate how nice it is to _not_ have to tip. For almost everywhere we've been, tips at restaurants are not expected, and hospitality staff are actually trying to help you rather than just get a tip. Being in India, where neither is true, has made me long for the simplicity of not having to worry about tipping, and wish that the U.S. would move to be less tip-based in the service industry.