---
layout: post
title: "Budapest: "
date: 2018-06-16
desc: "We spent four days in Budapest..."
keywords: "Europe, Hungary, Budapest, What to Do, goulash, RTW"
categories: [Europe]
tags: Hungary
icon: icon-html
image: blog/.jpg
author: Nate
country: Hungary
hidden: false

---


- hot, hot, hot
- didn't do that much, very laid back
- skipped the baths and ruin bars

After [our experience in Rome](/blog/2018/05/rome/), we were a bit wary of arriving in Venice and enduring the same level of over-crowding given how popular a destination it is. While it is certainly busy, and the tourist core is overflowing at times, we were pleasantly surprised by how easy it was to escape the crowds and find areas to wander through and eat where we felt almost like locals. Overall, we enjoyed our stay in Venice quite a bit more than expected, though after four days of exploring we were ready to board our train over the Alps into Switzerland.

We stayed at a perfectly-located Airbnb in the **San Polo** area of Venice, between the train station and the Rialto bridge. We were a ten-minute walk from anything, but also a bit removed from the most densely visited areas which was great to escape back to during the afternoon heat.

## <i class="fa fa-check-square" aria-hidden="true" style="color:#2495C4;"></i> What We Did in Budapest

### Food!

**Tuning Bar&Burger** - 

**Molnár's Kürtőskalács** - Kürtőskalács

**Frici Papa** - 

**Istanbul Restaurant** - 


### Tourist Sites

**Central Market** - 

**Fisherman's Bastion** - 

**Citadella** - 

**Margitsziget Island** - 

**Shoes on the Danube Bank** - 



## <i class="fa fa-check-square" aria-hidden="true" style="color:#2495C4;"></i> How We Did with Our Budget in Budapest

For our time in Budapest, the cheapest city we're visiting in Europe, we had budgeted only 55 USD a night for accommodations. We ended up spending only 47 USD per night for our Airbnb in Ferencváros, a residential area about a 20-minute walk from the core of downtown. 

We had also budgeted 15 USD per day per person for food and 15 USD per day per person for entertainment. Out of that planned 60 USD total, we ended up spending only 41 USD per day on average since we took such a low-key approach to our time in Budapest, with the biggest expenses being our lunches out. Overall we ended up underspending our total Budapest budget by a solid amount, which we'll happily add to our Prague budget so we can book our first food tour in a while! 

